Okay.
Take a listen. Okay, Darryl? What? Oh. Testing, one, two, three, four. Testing,
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven. Testing. How's Darryl? Does it sound
okay? That's what you always hear Darryl. Once he starts talking, it's loud. Oh,
wait a minute. Okay, try again. Testing, one, two, three, four. There it is.
Hello, testing. Hello, hello. Testing, four, three, two, one. Four, three, two,
one testing. Testing some more, one, two, three, four, four, three, two, one. I
think we can adjust the rest of it when we, that's tops. Okay. Okay. Okay.
Your name is pronounced Saberhagen, correct? Saberhagen, yes. I have a tendency
to say Saberhagen. I guess other people do too. Well, there are many variations.
Yeah. But Saberhagen is what they taught me when I was a kid. Yeah, that's good.
I guess that's it. Yeah. Oh, we ready? Are we rolling? Yeah, we're rolling. Oh,
should we go? Uh, yeah. Um, did you tell them what basic format of this is going
to be? Uh, what do you mean? I don't know how we're going to do the interview.
Oh, I thought we were. Oh, yeah. Uh, Mr. Saberhagen, could you tell us some
things about your, your origins as a writer? I, I, do I understand it that you
did not start out as a science fiction writer? Uh, Saberhagen. Saberhagen. Let
me try again. Sorry, did you? Did I say Saberhagen? Yeah. Sorry, okay. Uh, Mr.
Saberhagen, would you tell us a little about your origins as a writer? Uh, I
understand that you did not start out writing science fiction. Well, no, they,
the first thing I wrote and sold was, uh, science fiction. And, actually, I did,
my writing career did start with science fiction, and, um, through this I got a
job at Encyclopedia Britannica. I was on the editorial staff for five or six
years. They were bringing out their, uh, in the early, in the late 60s and early
70s, they had this complete revision of the whole, whole set. And they hired
many writers and editors for that. Uh, no, I, um, I started writing before I
was, uh, before I got into, uh, I can't say I got into fandom. Uh,
writing, writing science fiction was, was where it started. Okay, uh, you said
you did not, you, you didn't come out of the, the fan structure of science
fiction? You weren't one of them? No, I, I had, I had, uh, written and sold, uh,
a story, or a couple of stories, I guess, before I knew there were such things
as, as fan clubs and, uh, conventions and all this. Did you read much science
fiction before you started writing it? Yeah, I, I read, when I, when I was very
young, when I was like eight or nine years old, I came upon this, uh, old pulp
magazine, secondhand magazine someplace, and there were a couple of stories in
there that really impressed me. And I think they scared the daylights out of me,
actually. And I was, magazines of that kind were prohibited from, for a while
from being brought into the house. Because I guess I was sort of turned inside
out by some of these things. But, uh, then I, I just, you know, kind of went
away from it for a few years. And when I was about 16, I started, uh, haunting
the secondhand magazine shops, which they then had in Chicago. And, uh, picking
up old copies of Astounding, and, uh, which, as it was then called. And then I,
I didn't really get into writing, uh, until later on. I was in the, in the Air
Force in my twenties, and I would, I had a lot of time on my hands. I would make
a stab at it now and then. And, uh, still, I guess I didn't have access to a
typewriter and, uh, all this privacy and so on. And, still nothing really came
of it. And I was in, uh, let's see, I was almost 30 before I actually, uh,
sat down and seriously wrote a, wrote a story and, and really typed out the
manuscript properly and, and got it. Got it, got it, went and sent it off to be
sold. And then I, I started selling. I didn't sell everything I wrote, but I, I
started selling some things right away. And from then on, it's been my main
occupation. Well, not always a full-time job, but it's, it's what I've done.
You've never done any mainstream writing at all that was published? Uh, no, I
don't, uh, I
guess when, when you say mainstream, I guess I'm, I'm coming to think, uh, more
and more of mainstream as a, uh, as kind of an offshoot of, uh, of writing or
literature or whatever you call it, where you're, you're limited to, uh, to
things that could only happen with a high probability in the, in the next block,
in the next two months or something like that. And I think if you, if you look
back historically, uh, most of the literature has really been, been wide open.
You're allowed to use ghosts. You're allowed to use, uh, go to other planets.
You can do all these, uh, all these things. We've somehow turned this around
and, and put this in a, uh, its own little ghetto. But I think it's, it really
should be the other way. Um, would you be able to say anything about why it was
science fiction that made you, would you say science fiction made you become a
writer or would you have done so otherwise? What, what was it about the field
that, that detracted you and, and made you decide to, to try your hand at it? I
guess just the, the freedom of ideas of, um, being able to put in, uh, not, of
not being limited to, uh, the next block or the next two months. And the, uh,
the book I just finished, uh, for Ace, it's called Octagon. And it's probably as
close to a mainstream, uh, thing as I've ever done. It's, it's, uh, set in the
very near future. And it's about, largely about computers and programming and
people who play games with computers. And I, I guess when I started to write it,
it was, it was still science fiction. And by the time it's published, it may be,
uh, uh, a little, just a little out of date even. I don't know. A lot of
readers, uh, you probably know this. A lot of readers associate you, of course,
with the Berserker series. Yeah. And I think you might, to some readers, you
might be typed. You know, as, you know, Fred Saberhagen, the Berserker author.
Uh-huh. Does that, uh, does that bother you? Have you tried to, uh, or please
you? Have you tried to overcome that, or? I mean, I'm talking about readers who
don't know you very well. Obviously, you're, the body of your work is very
flexible. You've done many things. Yeah. Um, I think what, uh, what's got the
biggest reader response by far is the, uh, the Dracula books I've done. Uh, I
get more, uh, more letters and, uh, mail and sometimes more money for, for one
of those. And then for the, uh, you know, all the Berserkers. Uh, the Berserkers
have been around a long time and a lot of people have, uh, have picked up on
them over the years. But they're, uh, they're not really what's, what sells the
most books now. Uh, the response, you talk about reader response to the Dracula
material, uh, I guess there's no way of your knowing this, but would those be
science fiction readers responding? Or, uh, because I've, when I see, sometimes
when I see lists of your published work, they often leave the Dracula material
off of it because, I guess, you know, it's not considered a hard science
fiction. Yeah, some people, sometimes you see it on the fantasy, uh, uh, shelf
in the bookstore. Sometimes you see it in occult. Sometimes, sometimes you see
it on the new shelf where all the, the, uh, uh, the zombies and, and, uh,
haunted babies and all these, all these modern, uh, recent things, uh, appear.
Uh, I don't, I don't really care as long as people are reading it. Uh, I don't
know if they're science fiction readers. Some of them think they're vampires.
Uh, you get a pretty good, maybe some of them are vampires. You get a pretty
good letter here and there, uh, which I don't answer as a rule. Now, there have
been four of those books, right, beginning with the Holmes Dracula file? No,
the, the Dracula tape is the first one, which is a recounting of the original,
Bram Stoker's original Dracula story. Only seen from the view of, point of view
of the count. And there's Holmes Dracula, and an old friend of the family, and
Thorn, which is out now. And I'm talking to, about, to, uh, Jim Bain, the, uh,
editor at, uh, Tom Doherty Associates now about another. Um,
I think, I'm not sure what, I'm not sure about that one yet, but we're talking
about it. Well, as long as we brought up that, the home, the Dracula material,
um. Yeah, how is it that you got interested in, uh, that, one of the more
famous, uh, possibly mythological, possibly not mythological creatures? Well, I,
I, it started, I just sat down one day, and just, just for fun, I, I, uh, wanted
to reread the original Dracula, which I had read once before, years, years
earlier. And it's, I think it's not all that, that good a book, really, apart
from this, this titanic, uh, devilish, central character. And, uh, but it, it
struck me more and more as I, as I read through it, that, uh, Dracula was hardly
ever on stage. And this thing, everybody's talking about him, and he's almost
always off somewhere doing something nobody quite knows what.
So I guess maybe I had Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead on my mind, or
something like that. But I, I just thought, what would it look like from, uh,
from the chief villain's point of view? So, uh, off I went. It was, it was, uh,
an awful lot of fun to write, and it just seemed to go right along. And then,
uh, the, uh, time came to think about doing a sequel for it, and it occurred to
me that nobody had ever put Holmes and Dracula in the same book up to that
point, as far as I knew. And it, it seemed to me they, this would be very
interesting, it's as if they represented the two, two sides of the human psyche,
or, or, uh, you know, the intellect and the, the dark side. And here they were,
they were contemporaries, they were in the same, same city in the same year,
and, uh, uh, everybody knew about them both, and still they'd never, uh, you
know, they just completely, um, missed each other. So I decided I had to try to
make contact there someplace. Yeah, I, I rather enjoyed, uh, the, sort of the
contest, Will's, uh, Holmes' great intelligence against, uh, Dracula's great
experience. And, uh, especially if I remember correctly, one point where they're
in, uh, I believe it's in Holmes' study, and he's trying to coerce Dracula into
doing something, he's protecting himself with a gun. Uh huh. And, of course,
Dracula goes, well, that's not going to do anything to me, and Holmes shoots
him, and it's wooden bullets. Sorry. That was a, that was a marvelous scope of,
of ingenuity on your part. I like it. Um, did you research the, uh, the, the,
the character of Dracula? You must have researched him fairly extensively. Uh,
yes, I, I, I did what I could. I looked up the, uh, you know, the historical,
uh, sometimes you find, once you know his, his, uh, his other names and titles
and so on, sometimes you find references to him in these, these state historical
articles in, in Britannica or somewhere else, uh, you know, known as this, uh,
uh, prince who was rather hard on his people and, and, uh, everyone else who
came in the region. And, but you don't connect this, this guy with, uh, the, the
one in the legend. Uh, uh, what, what is the character that Dracula is based on?
He's, uh, what was his name? Oh, I can't, it's, it's Vlad, uh, Tepes or Tepesh
or something like, I can't really pronounce it the, uh, uh, way it should be.
But he was a, uh, a prince of, uh, Wallachia or Wallachia in, uh, not in
Transylvania, but, but very near to there. Uh, he lived in the 15th century. And
he finally married the sister of the King of Hungary. Uh, like I go into some of
this in, uh, in Thorn and the, uh, one that's out now. He, he was imprisoned by
the King of Hungary, supposedly for 12 years. And during this period, he somehow
married the King's sister.
And from then on, the name of the King's sister was expunged from all the
records. So we, I don't think anybody knows now today even what her name was.
And then Dracula was released and he was restored to power as, as a prince. And
then he was assassinated, uh, within a few months after that, I believe. And,
uh, if his history goes on in this world from that point, uh, it's, uh, not
verified by the history books. But there, there certainly was a real, uh, real
character. And then, then you get all these, these, uh, horror stories, atrocity
stories about him. Uh, many of which were, were really composed by his, his
political enemies of the time. So, it's, he was certainly pretty nasty, but
it's, it's doubtful if he was really as, as bad as all the stories would have
it. He had rather bad public relations. Yeah, I guess. Uh, in, in Thorn you had
sort of a dual storyline, uh, following, uh, some of the goings on back in the
15th century. And then another story happening in the present. Yeah. Um, why'd
you decide to write it that way? Well, I, there's a couple of reasons. I like to
do it that way because, uh, I think it moves, everything moves faster. If you
can switch from one, one group of characters to another, or from the same
character at one time to another time. And a lot of the, the housekeeping
things, people moving around and getting ready for the next scene. And so a lot
of that can go on off stage. And you just pick up where something is, is really
about to happen again. Um, and in effect it was like two, two short books. One,
one set in modern times and one in the 15th century, as you point out. And this
makes one sizable book. And one sizable book sells better than, than two short
books, I'm, I'm pretty sure. People seem to like, uh, big books, other things
being equal. Empire of the East is the, uh, certainly the best, best seller I've
had, uh, so far. And it's really three, three short books rewritten and put into
one volume. You said, pardon me. You said that reader response for Dracula. Do
that again. You need some time to chop that. Okay. You said that reader response
to the Dracula material was pretty high. Um, would you have written four books?
Were it not, was it reader response that made, that caused you to write the
four? Would you have stopped it earlier? I don't know. It's, it's hard to say. I
would, I would, um, sometimes you're wondering, should I write this book next or
that book? And, uh, meaning, uh, this idea or that idea. And if, if the editor
calls up and says, uh, will you do us another book about Dracula? Then you
naturally are nudged into picking that idea over, over some other one. Uh, so I
think it's a, kind of a mixed situation. Let's go on to the Berserker material
for just a little bit. Um, what got you started on that series? Do you remember
the impetus or the idea that's caused that? Yeah, that's, that's one of the, uh,
one of the standard questions that I'll interview. Uh, I was writing, uh, very,
let's see, back very early, uh, in the early 1960s. I was writing short stories,
most of which were being published in Galaxy or, uh, Worlds of If, Worlds of
Tomorrow. Fred Pohl was the editor then. Um, and I had this good idea for a
short, kind of a puzzle short story. Um, how is the hero who is out in his one
-man spaceship going to put together some kind of a, a, uh, device? Well, he has
an intelligent animal to help him. How is he going to use this, not, not really
intelligent, but, uh, moderately for animal. Uh, how is he going to use this,
uh, moronic, uh, assistant of his and a few standard parts and put together some
kind of a, uh, computing device that will play a game, you know, resembling
checkered or something like that. Yeah, it got fairly involved. Well, anyway, I
had this, this is the, the idea. I had an idea how we should do that. This is
how it started. And I got about halfway through the story and, uh, I said, well,
what sort of a villain will I have? And I said, I know what sort of villain I'll
have. I'll have this giant robotic spaceship, 50 miles in diameter, et cetera,
et cetera. And it just, uh, you know, I just looked around and there it was. And
I don't know that story is, is, uh, still being reprinted, by the way. It's
probably earns me more money this year than it did for first year it was, uh,
published. Uh, Fred Pohl really, uh, liked the berserker. He didn't, he bought
the story. He wasn't all that crazy about the story, but he liked the berserker.
And he said, why don't you do some more berserkers and have somebody go on one
of these things and, uh, so on. And, and it's just, uh, there for a while about
all I wrote was berserkers. Did you use the term berserker in that story? I
thought that story was the game, wasn't it, if I recall? No, that story was
called, uh, uh, I called it, well, I had two titles. I was, I was going to call
it To Move and Win. And Fred retitled it. He didn't like that. And he called it
Fortress Ship, which always struck me as, as something is not quite right,
because the, uh, the thing was neither a fortress nor a ship. Uh, so it's, it
appears under, under, uh, two or three different titles in different collections
and so on. The game came along much, much later. The term berserker though, did
you use that from the very beginning? That appears in the first, it says men
called it, a berserker. Now, I, now I suppose I'd put, uh, people called it a
berserker, right. Would you, uh, could you say a little bit about the origin of
that term? Um, well, it, it just seemed to, to pop up and, and naturally attach
itself. Of course, the, the berserkers historically are the, uh, Norse, uh,
warriors who would, who would go mad and, and, uh, run around killing people
until they were killed. And I don't know why it, it just seemed to come along
with the, uh, with the original concept and I used it.
Um, I, I, I was kind of curious about this. Have you ever worked out any sort of
a timeline for your berserker material? It almost seems to me like a future
history. Is it, was it menace such or could it be that way if somebody worked
out? I guess it could be. I, what I've, what I've tried to do is, is, is just
always leave plenty of room in every direction. I have this, this war going on
for thousands of years and over the, at least a good part of the galaxy. And
I've never really, uh, I guess if you asked me about two, two different stories,
I could probably tell you which one was supposed to come ahead of the other one.
Um, but, uh, I just wanted to avoid being, uh, being too limited. Fred, Fred
Pohl thought I, uh, was about to wipe out all the berserkers there at one point.
I did a story called Stone Place, where this huge berserker fleet was destroyed.
But I took care that, uh, some of them got away at least. Yeah. Of course, many
of the stories are related. I recall some of them you'll, you'll end a story and
then pick, pick it up sometime later. Sometimes, yeah, sometimes the same, uh,
characters, uh, uh, come and go. Uh, Johan Carlson and, uh, several others. And,
and, uh, it's kind of, uh, kind of fun to do that. I don't know if I'm going to
write another, um, right now I don't have any, any special urge to write another
berserker story. You know, they don't know if they ever will or not. Hmm. Uh,
what about the origin? The, the idea that, um, of course, the idea behind the
berserker, the way I read it, is that there's been this tremendous war, who
knows how far in the past. And the berserkers are the remnants of one of the,
one of the races had built these computer robotic creatures to destroy life.
Right. Um, do you think that, uh, a civilization that advanced would still have
violent, murderous tendencies, or would they tend to be more specific if they've
gotten that? Well, the only advanced civilization we know of has, from time to
time, uh, violent, murderous tendencies. And I, I don't see why, uh, why we have
to rule it out for, uh, for others. But isn't it, isn't it the human race, the
men in your, the whole series that, I get the impression if it weren't for the
human race against the berserkers, that they, they've retained their ability to
make war. Yes. The other, the other races of the galaxy might have been wiped
out by the berserkers. Yeah, that's, that's part of the background of the, of
the series. At least the races that we've, so, so far encountered. Um, I'm, I'm
always trying to leave, uh, leave the door open for, uh, you know, I can, I can
say, well, it really wasn't entirely that way. There was an exception here or
there somewhere. I was just curious because some people, I think it was, uh,
Norman Spinrad we talked to not too long ago, and he said any race that, uh,
that becomes sufficiently advanced, you know, space travel and all, you know,
far out that they could not be violent because they couldn't have gotten that
far, they would have destroyed themselves before then. Well, I don't know.
We're, here we are. We're on the verge of, of space travel and, uh, we're
certainly, uh, violent, uh, from time to time at least. And it's just not in our
best interest to destroy ourselves and I don't, I don't think we will. We could
have some nasty wars, but I don't think we're going to wipe ourselves out. Uh,
one of the stories, I had a specific question on one of your stories that
interested me, uh, I think it was called In the Temple of Mars. Uh-huh. Where
you use the, the background there of Chaucer's Night's Tale. Why, uh, what made
you do that? I was very curious about that. I, I guess I was just, had been
reading Chaucer probably and, and when something, uh, something grabs you or, or
moves you or, or seems very intriguing, then the tendency is just to, to put it
into a story. And, and, uh, I think stories, stories profit by having, uh,
different elements from, from different, uh, fields of ideas, uh, tied together.
Tied together, not just mixed, but somehow tied, tied together. Mm-hmm. And one
of the novels too, I think, Brother Assassin, um, premise there is time travel.
Yeah. This particular area, this particular planet, I guess. Okay, yeah, the,
the only, uh, I didn't, I didn't want, I, things would just get away from me, I
thought, if I had time travelers all over the galaxy and Berserkers at the same
time. Uh, so I, I limited time travel in the Berserker universe to this one, one
world. Yeah. You know, one of the questions I had though about the, the
particular encounter with the Berserkers there, uh, two things that to me were a
little unique. Uh, number one, there was a Berserker android, or pretty close to
one. He could pass with the Monks Cow and so forth.
But also at the end, the one Berserker that he implied that he had almost achieved life,
that he had reached the point where he could appreciate what life was and he wasn't going to destroy it.
That was the idea, yeah.
Could you explain how, in other words, a machine, what he's been around so long,
the evolution of machine intelligence to the point where...
Well, he has, as I recall it, first about the android.
I do have the androids in other stories.
Part of the, part of the rules of the game is that if a
human being gets a good close look at one, he's not fooled by it. He can't, uh,
uh, uh, about the robot achieving life. I think the idea was that he, he had
through his, his time traveling, uh, uh, there through so many, I forget how
many thousands of years, he had accumulated some kind of, of, uh, I forget what
I call it, evolutionary energy or something or other. It had acted on him as
nothing else would have and he, he did become alive. Or it didn't come alive.
Was, does that answer the question? Yeah. I found that interesting. I hadn't
noticed that in any of, any of your other, uh, stories or novels. No, he's the
only one. He's the only one that ever happened. In other words, it would be only
that particular unit of the Berserkers, not the, uh. Oh, not the whole, uh, not
the whole, uh, uh, uh, uh, assembly of them, no. Another question on that novel
I had, the, uh, two of the characters, I think it was Vincenzo and Brother
Jovan. Mm-hmm. Um, I notice, uh, in many of your works, you will use actual
historical incidents or frameworks. Were either of those characters based on
actual historical people? Well, yeah, Vincenzo is, is Galileo, of course. And
Brother Jovan is, uh, Francis of Assisi. I had suspected, I wanted to confirm.
Who were, of course, of course, were really several hundred years apart. But I,
I kind of wondered what would happen, uh, it's like Holmes and Dracula, you
know, I wondered what would happen if I, if I could bring them together and, uh,
get some kind of a spark from it. Yeah. Did you have any more on the Berserker
material? Uh, really one, but it's not for the tape. I'll ask you later. Just
some point that I don't understand. And somebody else who read it, probably,
everybody probably doesn't have been me. Well, if you want, if you want to bring
it up now. Okay, well, okay. Um, it's about, uh, it's on, it's in Berserker Man.
That was the latest one, right? Uh, yeah. Well, Ultimate Enemy, I think,
actually, but that's a collection. Yeah, this is a collection. And, uh, I forget
which, I think, I forget which one has come out more recently, really. Okay.
This one has stories that go further back, back in the 60s. Yeah, yeah. Okay.
Um, the suit, Lancelot? Lancelot, yes, the, the suit of armor that, uh, Michelle
wears, yeah. Um, at the end of the, uh, let me back up. Um, in Berserker Man, at
the end of it, um, where Michelle and Lancelot, the, uh, suit of armor that he
wears. Yeah. Um, they approach the core... Of the galaxy. Of the galaxy. And
they, uh, he meets, is that a collection of individuals who are living there in
the core? It's, uh, it's, it's a collection of representative individuals from
different, uh, the different intelligent races, or at least some of them, around
the galaxy. And there's one spot left open, you know, one, the siege perilous,
one chair is still, uh, still to be occupied. And this is for Michelle. And what
happens next, I really don't know. But presumably the whole, whole galaxy, you
know, the life in the galaxy moves up to some higher, higher level that we can't
understand at this point. The one Berserker he was pursuing in there. Yes. Uh,
once it, uh, what exactly happened to it? I got the, uh, some, or, uh, I assumed
that it realized what was there. Uh, well, it was, it was trying to reach this,
uh, this one remaining, uh, well, it, it didn't, it didn't know. At first it
didn't know it was there, and, uh, then it was trying to, to fill this one
remaining, uh, slot there. And it couldn't do it, it just ground to a halt on
the way. And possibly the realization that the Berserkers could never attain
that level? Uh, I guess something like that. I, I don't, I don't always think
all these things out consciously, I guess, but they... Sometimes it's better not
to nail it down. Uh, I think maybe it's better for the writer not to nail it. I
think it's a part, really part of the job of the, uh, you know, critics and
teachers and reviewers and whatever they... Um, to look into things and, and
find things there that the, uh, the writer didn't know about. Seriously. In
other words, once the writer has finished the work, it's no longer part of his
responsibility to, uh, to elucidate or explain, it's up to the readers and...
Basically, I think, yes, it's, uh, um, he can talk about it if he feels like as
I'm talking about it now. But it's really not, his job is really done, and it's,
it's, uh, if other people want to take it seriously, then it's, it's their job
to, uh, to work on it some. Um, interpretation will be left up to the individual
reader. Yeah, or the, the, uh, readers who get together and, and, uh, act as a
group if they want to do that. Well, okay, on that point, just, let me follow
that up just for one more point here. Um, science fiction, it seems to me that
there's one unique thing about the field, uh, the interaction between author and
fan. Like, maybe at the conventions and so forth, it seems to me that in no
other area of writing I can think of is there such a, an interaction, you know,
between authors and fans. Uh, aren't you asked, I mean, if you go to
conventions, maybe fan mail and so forth, aren't you pestered or asked by fans,
uh, what did you mean, what are you gonna do here? I mean, in other words, in no
other field of writing besides science fiction is there that kind of interplay?
Yeah. Doesn't that make science fiction author kind of special in his? Yeah,
there is, uh, often the fans, often the fans don't say, what are you going to
do? They, they come up and tell you what you did or they, uh, what you should
have done or something or other. Uh, yeah, some, some are, are very, uh, um,
very intelligent and, and see things that, uh, as I say, the writer, writer
himself doesn't see anything. Uh, do we have a, uh, break? Sure. Break it down.
Oh! We're still here. We're here. Are we here? I'm here. Testing one, two, three
here. We're all here. We're all here. Very good.
In your book, Empire of the East, the, uh, three separate stories were published
separately, weren't they? Uh, yeah, there were, originally there were three
books, uh, The Broken Lands, uh, The Black Mountains, and Changeling Earth. And
they came out some years earlier, uh, with, split up among two different
publishers, as it happened, the way, uh, problems of publishing and everything
being what they are. And then, uh, not long ago, uh, Jim Bain, uh, called me up
and said, why don't you take these three books, and,
uh, rewrite them, make a bigger ending.
The ending, ending you've got is too, too small for, for one giant book. Rewrite
them, and, uh, we'll publish them in one volume. And they did. And he did. And
even the, uh, big trade edition, it sold very well. And this one is, is doing
very well, and, uh, I'm very happy I got it. And I got a chance to, uh, to redo
it just the way I wanted it. Now, the reason I was asking is, uh, the main
character in the first book is Rolf. Yeah. And, but in the, in the second two
books, the main character shifts to, uh, Chuck. And I was just wondering if that
was because there was a time difference between, when you originally wrote them.
Well, no, I think maybe what it is, is, uh, people, villains, or people with a
good touch of villainy in them are more fascinating to me, at least. And I, I, I
seemed to do better with vampires, berserkers, uh, villainous, uh, warlords and
so on. And I just seemed to wind up approaching things from that point of view.
Well, did that, did that sort of grow as you, as you went through the series?
Like, at the beginning, you know, the first book, I thought Chuck was going to
be the, you know, the really bad guy. And I was fascinated to watch him. And I
don't suppose you could say he was turned into the hero or the good guy, but he
still changed and got a definite, did that grow as you wrote or did you plan
that? No, that, that grew. Um, when I started, I, I didn't, uh, when I started,
I knew I was fairly sure I was going to do a trilogy. And I started the first
book, I knew pretty well how the first book was going to end, but I had no idea
how the trilogy was going or, or who Ardna was going to turn out to be, you
know, if we ever solved the problem. So, and as I went along, it, it just seemed
to, you know, straighten itself out or, or take the form that it did. I have to
ask something about Ardna and the change. Um, maybe this isn't. Yeah. I'm out.
Yeah. Okay. That's okay. I was asking him a question. You are? That's right.
Okay. Yeah. Uh, the power that you call Ardna in the book, Empire of the East.
This may not be a fair question to ask of an author, but, um, I was puzzled by
what Ardna was. Uh, I know what his function was to initiate the change, I
suppose, way back. Yeah. But was he, was he sort of a supercomputer? Yeah. A
machine, in other words. That's, well, that, but then he, uh, he had become more
as, as, as the, when the world changed, uh, and these, the, the powers of magic and so on became effective,
then he could be more than a machine.
Just as a draught could be more than a dog and so on.
So in other words, the change, in addition to, I think what it did was, was to alter the structure of atoms and so forth.
Nuclear energy was impossible and magic came into being and so forth.
So there were widespread changes.
Yeah.
And Ardna's...
It's almost something like Larry Nibbins' magic goes away on the...
Not quite.
But at the end of that book, I got the impression that with the battle between Ardna and Orcus and I guess the annihilation of both, that magic and science or magic and technology now would both work or be blended in a new order of things.
Yeah, that was the idea.
The world was changing again and at least for a time, both of these kinds of powers would be functional.
You said that that's been your biggest seller, Empire of the East?
Yeah.
Well, it's...
Well, it hasn't been out in this form as long as some of the other books have, but it certainly, you know, certainly took off there, yeah.
One thing I notice in the overall body of your work is your...
What to me is an incredible flexibility.
It seems to me like you write hard science fiction, you write science fantasy, you write social or soft science fiction.
You write horror, I think, and specimens was sort of a horror story.
Do these stories just come to you or do you deliberately set out to do different kinds of things?
Oh, I set out to do different kinds of things, yeah.
Deliberately, I mean.
Oh, yeah, depending on what the idea is that you start with.
I wouldn't want to do a hard science fiction story about Dracula.
I think probably it would be impossible.
So if you want to write about Dracula, you have to accept at least part of the rules of the supernatural story.
What about that book when I enjoyed very much specimens?
It seemed to me that that was an attempt to write a horror story with a haunted house and underneath.
But it's also the science fiction at the end when you realize the creatures from outer space.
Yeah, it was an attempt to write a good grade B movie plot and nobody has bought it yet to make a good grade B movie.
But there's a new ace edition coming out in a few months here and maybe somebody will.
But in other words, your intent was to, you know, the horror realm, to do something of that sort.
Yeah, just kind of a fun story, if you can call it that, of menace to be overcome.
The old house in the story, by the way, really exists in Lombard.
When we were dead three years ago, when we lived in Chicago, we were looking for houses in the area there.
And that was one that we looked at.
Another one, another book too, that to me was...
I don't know if the present owners have read the book or not, probably.
Go ahead.
Had I not known you had written it, I wouldn't have guessed you did.
The Love Conquerors All.
To me, that was sort of in the tradition of space merchants, social science fiction, extrapolating and current tendencies.
What was it again, the origin, I guess, the impetus, the interest in that kind of thing?
The impetus, I guess it was the controversy about abortion and sex.
Things were bombarded, questions were faced with all the time here.
And I just tried to, you know, the traditional science fiction writers viewpoint,
take a look at everything, turn everything inside out and see how it looks from the other point of view.
Would I misread that book to call it a dystopia?
It certainly was not a very pleasant society, I guess.
I don't know, it has not been one of my best-selling books, apparently.
I was going to ask about reader response to that, how it had sold.
It's not sold all that well, I don't know.
I expect it's going to be kept in print, maybe with a different cover.
Sometimes those things have an effect.
I thought you had fun writing that.
I enjoyed the way you would turn around, well, I don't know everything, the vocabulary,
the little everyday expressions that people used based on this kind of society.
Did you have fun constructing all of that and writing that?
The word repression is almost an obscenity.
And instead of curse words, you would use chastity or purity.
Was that fun to dream all that up and write?
I don't remember that as fun in the sense that Dracula tape was fun.
It was more, I think I felt more seriously there that I was trying to get at something serious
by approaching it in this backward way.
In a sense, it's always fun to work at something you like to do.
Would you say that of your work, that book might be the closest to having a message or a theme to it?
Well, I hope it doesn't sound like a preachment of any kind, because that's pretty deadly.
I suppose maybe it's...
You get into the question of does art carry messages and is what we're doing art or what are we doing?
Basically, I'm just trying to write what I think are good stories,
and the rest of it take care of itself, I guess.
The reason I ask, I guess I would have called the book satire in a lot of ways,
and it seems to me a satirist almost by definition has a moral purpose, whether it's obvious or not.
Would I be wrong in calling it satire in some ways?
No, I think that's your department, really.
Whether it's satire or what it is, I think as I said, I think I've done my job when I've written it.
So I wouldn't say you're wrong.
Classify it however you will.
Okay, my favorite book of your work, this is just my personal opinion, is The Mask of the Sun.
I enjoyed reading that very much.
It seems to me you had to do... I don't know, maybe you are knowledgeable in the field,
but did you have to do research on the Incas, the past, the culture you're writing about?
I didn't actually go there. My wife has been there.
She spent a little time in Peru before we were married,
and she had some slides and some books and could answer some questions, and that helped a lot.
I've never been there, but I was intrigued by this, what if possibility if the first Spanish expeditions of conquest had failed
as they came so close to failing, several points, and we might have a situation where Peru would have turned out something like Japan
being exposed to western civilization, but not overwhelmed by it, and going on developing their own way for hundreds of years afterward.
Okay, that and Brother Assassin I think would be your major works which deal with time travel, right?
I can't think of any other at the moment.
Yeah, that's the... you use time travel simply as a science fiction device, an area of speculation,
or is it something that you think has possibilities?
Is any time travel work fantasy? I think Larry Niven said that.
If you deal with time travel, you're dealing with fantasy because it's impossible.
Well, I would hesitate to say what's physically ultimately impossible.
I don't think we really begin to know yet what things the universe can produce in the way of just physical effects
and conditions and so on.
It's hard to see logically how a time travel story can be constructed
because go back and murder your grandfather and all that cliches.
But I think it's very useful as a device.
I've just finished editing a book for Ace. It's called Spade Full of Spacetime.
I have stories from 12, 13 different writers in there about probing the past, not by means of a time machine.
I ruled out time machines and simply getting in your... whatever, and going back to an earlier year.
I wanted people to, to think about, uh, scientific
investigations of the past and however, however they could, uh, could do it
without, uh, without simply going back. And I think I got some very good stories
in there. Not quite as, as, uh, much hard science as I hope to get, but I think
it'll be very interesting when, uh, when it comes out. Uh, when you start
writing a story, do you first develop the characters and then form the story
around them or, uh, form the story and then develop the characters for it? Or
how do you do that? I think I have the story first. And somebody, uh, James
Jones or somebody, I think, said that, uh, every writer has his stock company
of, of characters. They, it's like an actor, group of actors, they, they sort of
change their names and, and faces a little bit and come on and perform. And I,
sometimes I suspect I have a, uh, I hope they're versatile. They don't, they
don't always come out the same. But the, the idea comes first for the
characters, for me. How far ahead do you plan works in progress? Do you, what,
do you have a list of works that you're going to write? Do you work by schedule
or by mood or? Well, I, I work by, uh, schedule when I have a chance and kids
are all off at school. It's the best time. And, uh, I have, in the back of my
mind, I have a, uh, sort of a list of things to be done. And then I have things
that I have contracted to do. And, of course, they have, that takes on a new
form of reality then. You have to really start at it. But there's no, seems to
be no shortage of ideas. Are we still having one? Yeah. Why don't we check? Did
you drop on your tape? We just have a few more minutes. We're going to put on
one more tape and catch a little bit more. Is that okay? Okay. Yeah.